# Variables

Learn how to store values in C++

A variable is a name that represents a particular piece of the computer’s memory that has been set aside for storing, retrieving, and using data. This article will cover the following topics:

- Declaring a variable
- Declaring multiple variables
- Constant variables

## Creating a Variable

In order to create a variable, three pieces of information need to be present:

1. **Data type**: The type of data the variable will store.
2. **Name**: The unique name of the variable. Names cannot start with a number and cannot be a C++ keyword.
3. **Value**: The value the variable will store. This value must match the type of the variable.

### Declaring a Variable

Declaration means to create a variable and assign a value to it. This is also called initialisation. The common expression is “initialise name to value”:

```cpp
type name = value;
```

**Style tip**: Variable names should be lowercase, with underscores between words (snake case). For example, grade or student_id.

### Defining a Variable

Definition means to create a variable without assigning a value to it:

```cpp
type name;
```

### Assigning a Variable

To assign or change the value of an existing variable, state the name of the variable followed by the assignment operator (`=`) and the new value:

```cpp
name = new_value;
```

**Note**: changing the value of an existing variable will overwrite the old value.

Let’s look at some examples of variable declaration and assignment in C++:

```cpp
// Define a variable called letter
char letter;

// Declare a variable called number and initialize it to 21
int number = 21;

// Assign 18 to number
number = 18; // number is now 18
```

### Declaring Multiple Variables

Multiple variables of the same type can be declared in a single statement using a comma-separated list. For example:

```cpp
// Declare three integer variables
int a = 1, b = 2, c = 3;
```

Avoid the two common mistakes that new programmers tend to make when declaring multiple variables on a single line.

The first mistake is giving each variable in the list a type:

```cpp
// Incorrect syntax - no need to state int twice
int a = 1, int b = 2;

// Correct syntax
int a = 1, b = 2;
```

The second mistake is trying to declare different types of variables in the same statement:

```cpp
// Incorrect syntax - we cannot declare int and double in the same statement
int a = 1, double b = 2.3;

// Correct syntax
int a = 1;
double b = 2.2;
```

## Constant Variables

Constant variables are variables with values that cannot be changed after initialization. The purpose of a constant variable is to protect its value from being accidentally altered elsewhere in the program.

Constant variables are declared with the const keyword. For example:

```cpp
const double pi = 3.14;
```

It’s impossible to inadvertently change the value of a constant variable after it has been declared:

```cpp
const double pi = 3.14;
pi = 3.15;          // Error: cannot assign value to const variable
```

Constant variables must be initialized when they are declared. Declaring a constant variable without providing a value will cause an error:

```cpp
const double pi;    // Error: cannot define const variable without initialization
