# Data Types

A variable in C++ must be assigned a specific type. Type is important because it tells the compiler how to interpret the content of a variable.

Data types occupy different amounts of memory space. Remember that in computer science, a byte is a unit of data that is eight binary digits long. It is the unit most computers use to represent a character such as a number (e.g. 42), letter (e.g. z) typographic symbol (e.g. 是), or even an emoji (e.g. 😁).

There are 5 basic data types that every C++ programmer should know about:

## `int`

`int` stores whole numbers without decimals. An `int` variable requires 4 bytes of memory space and ranges from -2³¹ to 2³¹.

```cpp
int moonLanding = 1969;
int age = 18;
```

## `double`

`double` stores floating-point numbers with decimals. A `double` variable requires 8 bytes of memory space and is sufficient for storing up to 15 decimal digits.

```cpp
double pi = 3.14159265359;
double height = 1.75;
```

### Type Conversion

It is possible to convert `int` into `double` and vice versa. This is called a type conversion or a type casting.

The notation (type) value means "convert value to type"; for example:

```cpp
// Converting a double to an int
double a = 3.5;
int b = (int) a;            // b is now 3

// Converting an int to a double
int c = 5;
double d = (double) c;      // d is now 5.0
```

**Note**: Going from `double` to `int` simply removes the decimal. There’s no rounding involved.

## `char`

`char` stores a single character surrounded by single quotes ' '. A `char` variable requires just 1 byte of memory space.

```cpp
char first_letter = 'a';
```

## `string`

`std::string` stores a sequence of characters surrounded by double quotes " ".

```cpp
# include <string>

std::string message = "Hello World!";
```

**Note**: `std::string` is not a built-in data type! The <string> library must be included before `std::string` can be used.

### String Methods

`std::string` comes with a plethora of useful methods. Here are a few of them:

The `+` operator can be used to combine strings together. This is called concatenation:

```cpp
std::string first_word = "Hello,";
std::string second_word = "World!";

std::string message = first_word + " " + second_word;
// message is now "Hello, World!"
```

The `[ ]` operator can be used to access the character at the specified position in the string:

```cpp
std::string message = "Hello World";

char letter = message[1];
// letter is now ‘e’
```

**Note**: Index in C/C++ starts at 0, not 1.

The `length()` function can be used to get the length of a string:

```cpp
std::string message = "Hello World";

int message_length = message.length();
// message_length is now 11
```

## `bool`

`bool` stores `true` or `false` boolean values. A `bool` variable requires just 1 byte of memory space.

```cpp
bool in_class = true;
bool late = false;
```

The main purpose of `bool` is to manage the flow of conditional statements (`if`-`else`, `loop`, etc.). Control Flow will be covered in more detail in the next section of this course.
