# Reference and Pointers

Learn how to manipulate memory in C++.

When a variable is declared, a free memory address is set aside for the purpose of storing the value inside that variable. C++ provides two powerful features that allow programmers to directly manipulate memory:

- References
- Pointers

Memory manipulation has many use cases in C++. For example, it is used for dynamic memory allocation and advanced data structures such as linked lists and trees.

## References

In C++, a reference variable is an alias to an existing variable. It is declared by using an ampersand & between the reference type and the variable name: [AS A SUFFIX OF THE REFERENCE TYPE]

```cpp
int exam_grade = 85;
int& score = exam_grade;
```

The score variable is an alias to the exam_grade variable. When the value of score is changed, the value of exam_grade will also change in the same way.

Be careful about two things when declaring a reference variable:

- References must be initialized: there is no such thing as an empty reference.
- References cannot be reassigned: reassigning an existing reference variable will produce unexpected results.

```cpp
double& volume;    // Compiler error, reference not initialized.

int x = 1, y = 2;
int& num = x;
num = y;    // Reassigning references will result in undesired behavior!
```

The primary application for references in C++ is in function parameters. Because the reference parameter acts as an alias for the argument, a function that uses a reference parameter is able to modify the argument passed in.

## Memory Address

When not used in a declaration, the ampersand symbol `&` is called the address of operator and is used to access the memory address of a variable. This can be done by preceding the name of a variable with `&`:

```cpp
std::string message = "Hello, World!";

// Print the value of message
std::cout << message << std::endl; // prints "Hello, World!"

// Print the memory address of message
std::cout << &message << std::endl; // prints hexadecimal address, e.g., "0xb73eb000"
```

Example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

int main ()
{
  int exam_grade = 85;
  int& score = exam_grade;

  // changing score will also change exam_grade
  score += 7;
  std::cout << exam_grade << std::endl;
  std::cout << score << std::endl;

  // print the memory address of message
  std::string message = "Hello World!";
  std::cout << message << std::endl;
  std::cout << &message << std::endl;

  return 0;
}
```

## Pointers

A pointer in C++ is **a variable that stores a memory address as its value**. Pointer variables are declared with an asterisk `*` between the data type and the variable name. A pointer variable must point to a data type of the same type. For example, `int*` means “pointer to an `int` variable”.

```cpp
int* age;
char* initial;
```

Just like normal variables, pointers are empty when they are declared and need to be initialized. A pointer variable is usually assigned with a memory address obtained by the address of operator `&`.

So suppose we have a variable called "day":

```cpp
std::string day = "Monday";
```

We can create a pointer variable called "ptr" and point to it by:

```cpp
std::string* ptr = &day;
```

Pointers are similar to references in the sense that when the pointer’s value changes, the value of the original variable will also change in the same way:

```cpp
*ptr = "Friday";

// Print: Friday
std::cout << *ptr << std::endl;

// Print: Friday
std::cout << day << std::endl;
```

## Dereferencing

When not used in a declaration, the asterisk symbol `*` is called the dereference operator and is used to obtain the value pointed to by a pointer variable. This can be done by preceding the name of a pointer variable with `*`.

Going back to the previous example, the `*` operator can be used to dereference ptr:

```cpp
// Reference: print the memory address of day (0x7ffd1d8306c4)
std::cout << ptr << std::endl;

// Dereference: print the value of day (Friday)
std::cout << *ptr << std::endl;
```

## Null Pointer

It is dangerous to leave a pointer variable uninitialized. If you are unsure where to point, assign that variable to nullptr, which is a keyword that provides a typesafe pointer value representing an empty pointer.

```cpp
int* ptr = nullptr;
```

Note: In older C/C++ code, NULL was used for this purpose. nullptr is meant as a modern replacement to NULL.
