# C++ Program Structure

- **ford. - Headspace
- **Rival Consoles - Frontiers
- Erik Buschmann - You = Goosebumps
- Nocturnal Sunshine - Drive

This section will cover syntactic concepts that are essential for writing your first C++ program.

Before getting started, let’s take a closer look at our _Hello World!_ example to see how a typical C++ program is structured.

```cpp
1 #include <iostream>
2 using namespace std;
3
4 int main() {
5   cout << "Hello, World!";
6   return 0
7 }

```

The program above simply prints the phrase _Hello, World!_ in the terminal. Here is a breakdown of how this task is achieved through C++:

## Preprocessor Directive

```cpp
#include <iostream>
```

The above line is a preprocessor directive, a special type of statement that starts with the `#` symbol and is examined before actual compilation.

The include keyword is used here to import libraries. Standard library names must be enclosed in angle brackets `< >`, whereas user-defined library names must be enclosed in double quotation marks `" "`.

The library being imported in this program is the `iostream` library, which stands for input/output stream. This library allows us to use `cout` (pronounced"_see out_", short for "character out") on line 5 and print the _Hello, World!_ message.

```cpp
using namespace std;
`

The above line introduces the _namespace_ `std` into the current program. This line allows the usage of standard library objects without prepending the `std::` identifier.

If this line is omitted, the `cout` on line 5 (or any other standard library object) must be replaced with `std::cout`.

Note: Most code examples in this course will omit this line and prepend the std:: identifier instead. This is to clarify which objects are from the standard library.

## The `main()` function

```cpp
int main() {
`

This is the beginning of the `main` function. Every C++ program must have a `main` function in order to run.

In this case, the `main` function has a return type of `int` and takes in no function parameters.

```cpp
cout << "Hello, World!";
```

The above line is responsible for printing out the hello world message.

```cpp
return 0;
}
```

This line is a return statement, which terminates a function and returns something to the caller. A return value of **0** indicates that the main function has finished running with no problems.

Finally, the closing curly bracket } signifies the end of the `main` function.
